[Music]
the Amazon rainforest is big news right
now as fires continue to consume its
lush landscape it's essential to our
planet's climate ecosystem and more if
we do nothing the Amazon could be gone
within 100 years what would that mean
for us one we'd miss out on important
medicine a lot of the ingredients in our
modern medicines come from the plants of
the Amazon these include the most
important medications such as essential
vaccines many of the plants of the
Amazon are still being studied today
with the hope of finding ingredients
that will here some of our most serious
diseases if all the plants are wiped out
we could lose our chance at advancing
our field of medicine to the economy of
South America would be ruined the Amazon
rainforest covers about 40 percent of
South America covering eight countries
if it was suddenly gone a lot of South
America's exports and businesses would
disappear with it
millions of people depend on the amazon
basin for their income it would
certainly be devastating for South
American people it would also seriously
damage the global trade route which
would impact the whole world 3 the world
would lose oxygen the Amazon is referred
to as the planets lungs for a reason
our planet gets 20% of its oxygen from
this rainforest due to its massive size
if the fires continue not only will we
lose that huge oxygen source but extra
pollution will be released fires caused
carbon monoxide nitrogen dioxide and
other nasty gases and toxins to run
rampant through the environment normally
all the Amazons trees would do the
cleanup for us given that all trees
convert carbon dioxide to oxygen but
without them
we'd be at the mercy of those toxins
for there'd be a huge loss of wildlife
covering just over two million square
miles the Amazon is home to 30% of our
planet's wildlife it's also home to some
animals that can't be found anywhere
else we'd be losing important
biodiversity which refers to the variety
of life in an ecosystem why is
biodiversity so important it prevents
extinction and allows plants and animals
to keep evolving and adapting if there's
no biodiversity it could wipe out an
entire ecosystem five it was speed up
global climate change
fires are actually normal in the Amazon
during the dry season they've just never
been this out-of-control before to cope
with the fires of the dry season the
rainforest came up with its own toxic
storage system helped along by the huge
number of trees if all the trees were
gone that storage system would no longer
work and those toxins would heat up the
atmosphere this would disrupt the
atmospheric circulation placing that
heat where it's not supposed to be like
in the Arctic melting glaciers 6 the
rainforest would become a carbon source
let's unpack that storage system a
little more the Amazons trees absorb
carbon dioxide a primary greenhouse gas
greenhouse gasses are able to trap and
reflect the sun's radiation back to
earth scientists say that about 86
billion tons of carbon dioxide are
embedded in the Amazon if all the trees
are burned instead of storing carbon
dioxide it'll be released affecting the
climate atmosphere and air quality on a
global scale 7 there would be a loss of
natural resources in addition to oxygen
and medicinal plants
we'd also lose a substantial supplier of
minerals fresh water and food as far as
minerals go we lose a primary source of
gold silver tin copper and zinc as for
that essential water the Amazon River
provides 20% of the world's fresh water
from its 1,100 tributaries
and if you love your hot cup of coffee
in the morning well if the Amazon were
destroyed you can pretty well kiss your
morning joe goodbye in addition to
fruits rice and chocolate just to name a
few
eight soil erosion
we don't usually give soil a lot of
thought but it can actually cause a lot
of damage when it moves around soil is
held in place by plants mainly by the
roots of trees if there are no trees to
hold it in place storms and winds can
push it around polluting water and even
causing dangerous mudslides the soil
could also clog irrigation structures
causing a big problem for farmers and it
could potentially cause a loss of
electricity 9 we could start seeing a
cycle of more fires the rainforests can
repair itself and grow again after a
normal forest fire given that enough
young trees survive but if the saplings
don't survive the smoke and other gases
from the fire will dry the air out for
miles also a healthy rainforest can
produce its own rain making any burned
and damaged areas lush again if the
compromised Amazon can no longer do this
coupled with the dry air fires will pop
up everywhere even long distances away
there won't be anything to naturally
stop the fires or repair the damage as
evolution intended 10 unpredictable
droughts and rainfall patterns science
has shown that rain forests in general
influence the climate both globally and
locally if we get into this scary
unending cycle of Amazon rainforest not
being able to generate rain getting dry
and causing widespread wildfires
droughts would be inevitable it would
still rain but it would be less often
and without help from the rain forest it
would be difficult to estimate when the
next rain will come making life
unpredictable for plants animals and
farmers
eleven we could see disastrous floods
I've talked a lot about fires and
droughts so this one might not make
sense but stay with me yes there would
be less rainfall but without the trees
and plants of the rainforest to absorb
excess water a random heavy rainfall
could result in large amounts of
flooding this doesn't go just for the
Amazon River either any body of water
would be at risk unhealthy soil would
add to the disaster excessive rain plus
unanchored soil equals mudslide farmland
and homes would be overcome with rain
and mud twelve overcrowded cities as I
mentioned earlier the Amazon rainforest
bans across eight countries in South
America all of this disaster would
affect the rural population first
meaning the 30 million people that live
outside the cities rural people will be
forced into the cities which are already
home to millions
this will cause overcrowding which comes
with its own problems possible rises in
crime low job availability resulting in
increased poverty and a higher risk of
disease 13 change in landscape if the
Amazon rainforest totally collapses what
was once healthy green rainforest will
look and feel more like the Sahara
Desert the climate will be dry and
certainly wouldn't support the same
wildlife as before where there were once
trees and colorful tropical flowers
there would be flat dusty desert or
savanna 14 hours of daytime darkness
even now the amount of smoke from the
fires is causing some areas of South
America to experience periods of
darkness during the daytime particularly
in Brazil the smoke can even be seen
from space
in fact more than 72,000 fires in the
Amazon have been seen from space since
January the resulting smoke is capable
of stretching thousands of miles there
were 1700 miles between the fires and
the location of the blackout
a little bit more about deforestation
forest fires aren't the only thing
responsible for destroying the Amazon
rainforest other forms of deforestation
include logging and adding
infrastructure like more roads to
growing cities stricter laws are being
put in place in an attempt to curb
deforestation of any type and save the
Amazon is there anything we can do yes
we're not at the point of no-return yet
there are a lot of websites set up to
help you learn more about the Amazon and
donate to the cause if you want some of
them are pretty fun they might let you
donate to plan a tree in the Amazon or
adopt a sloth there are easy things you
can do at home in addition to educating
yourself that will make a difference
be sure to recycle use those stainless
steel straws try to waste less paper
know where your food comes from and how
it gets to your table there are lots of
ways to help even if donating isn't an
option hey if you learn something new
then give this video a like and shared
with a friend here are some more videos
I think you'll enjoy just click to the
left or right and remember stay on the
bright side of life
[Music]